Surplusage in the Fourth Amendment?|||20150207|||nThe fourth amendment to the US constitution says..

'The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.'

The first clause in particular, being.. 

'The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated..'

One reading of the first clause of the fourth amendment, is that it lists two distinct activities (searching and seizing), and that the government cannot conduct those either of those activities (of persons, houses, papers, or effects) if it is not reasonable to do so. This reading, the modern one, is different from the original one held by the framers of the fourth amendment. Ill examine the use of the word 'unreasonable' below.
|||nThe use of the word 'unreasonable' wasnt meant to suggest that if the search and seizure was reasonable, then we are not secure in our property. The word 'unreasonable' stands where it does in the clause to affirm that searches and seizures, entirely, are unreasonable. The use of the word 'unreasonable' wasnt try to narrow the our protection down to a certain kind of search or seizure, but rather it was making an extra statement about searches and seizures, that being that they are unreasonable. This is actually pretty consistent with how the framers spoke english: they werent afraid to make long unweildy sentences that said everything about everything. A modern speaker who wanted to phrase the first clause might instead say two sentences, one of which would be 'searches and siezures are unreasonable.'.

One might think its weird to include the word 'unreasonable' at all. If the clause made no mention of reasonableness, it would have done effectively the same thing. So why include the word? Well, at the time, it wasnt actually uncommon for laws to contain sort of 'mini arguments' for their own existence. For example, the constitution of Massachusettes says.. 

'The freedom of deliberation, speech, and debate, in either house of the legislature, is so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the foundation of any accusation or prosecution, action or complaint, in any other court or place whatsoever.'

The constitution of Massachusettes establishes a freedom of speech, but not a freedom contingent on speech being essential to the rights of the people. If one read the constitution of Massachusettes that way, one would only need to establish that the rights of the people were not contingent on free speech, to rob people of their freedom of speech. 

Some times it just seems like the framers of the constitution would just open up and speak their mind when writing legal documents. For example, Thomas Jefferson writes in his famous Virginia Statute for Religious Freedom, 'Whereas, Almighty God hath created the mind free;', and also 'That the impious presumption of legislators and rulers, ...  hath established and maintained false religions over the greatest part of the world and through all time;'. In that second sentence, Jefferson states a fact, one which isnt clearly true or false, and is certainly uninstructive. It would be just like if the legislature of Virginia voted on a statute that said 'Virginia is on the east coast'. So what if a legislature establishes that 'Virginia is on the east coast'? And what does it even mean to vote on a fact, which would be true or false no matter how people voted? What does that mean to law enforcement?|||nThere is a legal concept called 'the rule against surplusage', which requires jurists to interpret the law in such a way that minimizes the number of meaningless words and phrases. A reading of the fourth amendment in which the word 'unreasonable' has no role is not selected by the rule against surplusage (when, ceteris paribus, there is an alternative interpretaton that does give meaning to the word 'unreasonable'). The rule against surplusage then, takes us to an interpretation that was not the intent of the writers of the fourth amendment.

What counts as a valid meaning under the rule against surplusage? Its not that the word 'unreasonable' doesnt say anything. The framers use of the word 'unreasonable' tells us that searching and seizing are unreasonable. We know what that means. In that sense at least, the word does have meaning. But no matter how clear that is, it doesnt instruct anyone on how to enforce the fourth amendment. There could have been a third clause to the fourth amendment that said something inane, like the definition of the word 'sandwich'. The definition of 'sandwich' would have been clear too, and like the use of the word 'unreasonable' it wouldnt aid legal interpretters in knowing what kind of conduct the government is obligated to when searching and seizing.

Is a meaningful word under the rule against surplusage simply comprehensible, or must it instead, actually hold relevance? Maybe there is a third option.

What if instead, the fourth amendment had said 'reasonable' instead of 'unreasonable'? Again, the use of the word doesnt narrow the legal protection only to a certain kind search and seizure, but just describes searches and seizures generally. Wouldnt a reader be some what confused that what is admitted as reasonable, is also forbidden by the amendment? When a writer simply tells their thoughts about the law, in the law itself, the reader has the opportunity to check if the thoughts are consistent with the law. This style of writing has the advantage, that if the reader found something strange of contradcitory between the law and the expressed thoughts behind the law, they would know they didnt understand the law. Had the writer not expressed their sentiment, the reader might unknowingly develop a misunderstanding of the law. The writer therefore has a reason to simply open up and express themselves in their law, for it alerts a reader motivated to understanding the law, when they do not understand it.

That makes enough sense to me, but I also wonder, does that use of language qualify as 'meaningful' under the rule against surplusage?