Constructing Rights|||20150814|||nIn legal function, a negative right to B obstructs the government from interfering with the conduct B of normal people. In constrast there are positive rights, which goes beyond a mere obligation to not interfere with B, but also obligates the government to actively provide a means to B.

The US constitution provides mainly negative rights (like the freedom of speech, and the right to bear arms), and a few positive rights (like the right to a fair trial). The ninth amendment to the US constitution basically requires jurists to assume that for any kind of activity X, people have a negative right to X. The US constitution says that we have a negative right to everything. When US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt wished to amend the US constitution with his 'Second Bill of Rights', which mentions the rights to work and education, I believe he was advocating positive rights (the negative rights to work and education are already protected).

Its almost peculiar that we call both of these rights, as if they were two varieties of essentially the same thing. In essence they arent the same at all. They are opposites. A positive right empowers the government; a negative right constrains it. A positive right permits the government to invade our lives; a negative one forbids it. Furthermore, our language makes people the bearers of rights, even tho the legal significance of rights is borne by the government and lawyers (which isnt to say anything about the social significance felt by people).

Lets figure out what rights are, and lets do it from scratch, ignoring this careworn use of the word 'right' that fits even contradicting political philosophies.|||nRights are narrower reformulations of the assumption that people should be able to act as they would like. That isnt to say that we should endorse all activity, but that we should start with the assumption that a person should be able to engage in their activity. The concept of rights is the initial assumption, that if one does an activity outside any knowing by the government, then it was for the best that they did that activity.

In the US declaration of independence, Thomas Jefferson spelt out that people possess the rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The US Bill of rights also says that we have a right to speech. If the content of a life is what a person does in their life, and speech is a type of activity in ones life, then the right to speech is a narrower reformulation of the right to life. Rights are extentions of the right to life. We reformulate our basic assumption (that there is a right to life, that there is a right to act freely) in order to make law practicable. It is purely pragmatic, that only some of the rights we possess appear in the bill of rights (the right to wear a hat is absent, and also not something the government is tempted to violate).

Formulated rights, which are narrower than the broadest right (the right to life), are specified as narrowly as they can without losing the sense of what is threatened by government action. One could visit the Washington monument, and therefore one has a right to visit the Washington monument, but what is more general than visiting the Washington monument, is simply visitation.|||nSince we have equivocated life with the activity of ones life. Our rights only save us to our activities, and dont gaurantee us things, or what our activities are pursuant to. We have a right to work, but only if the 'work' in question isnt an object- isnt something we seek out through activity. Its not the duty of the government to give people what they want, but to enable them to get it themselves.

I dont mean to deny that we have rights to privacy, contract, or a fair trial. These rights must be constructed. Rights are specified at all, because it is necessary for the practice of law. Law must be practiced, and thus rights must appear in our language in such a way that facilitates that practice. When the right to an activity B is expressed, it is a construction by means of narrowing from the right to do everything. Rights are narrowed, because it would be disasterious for lawyers to go on great philosophical journeys every time they wanted to defend someones conduct.

When we have a right to a manner of conduct it is a construction by means of bundling. The right to privacy, obstructs the government from getting involved in our private affairs. Our affairs are activities, which come in innumerable forms. The right fo privacy is a bundling of those innumerable forms, for the practical reason that lawyers cannot afford to numerate the innumerable. It would be an interference to a wide variety of activities, if the government simply knew about them, and it is far easier to specify the means of interference than it is to specify all that can be interfered by the condition.

Thus we have a reason to expect a kind of conditional legal wishy-washiness, since a construction can be misapplied. The notion of corporate rights is constructed out of a need to protect the rights of the people in companies, who are numerous, and could be deprived of their rights individually if their organization was not also protected. The construction of corporate rights can be misapplied if its application instead violates the rights of a companys members.|||nArent killing and stealing activities that fall under the category of 'everything one could do in their life'? Yes. And that only admits, that sometimes rights clash. Even nobler rights clash with each other. I have no method to calculate which right wins a clash. Lets consider some arguments against the right to murder.

One could say the right to murder loses out, because murder is actually a rare compulsion, and almost never appears in human life, even if it is something one 'could do in their life'. This would rely, on a naturalistic notion of right to life. The right to life would be a right to some very general description of human life, and not a right to the full collection of possible things one could do in a life. The rights to unusual activitie would always lose.

One could also argue that since murder terminates the life of the victim, is in the protection of human activity that the right to murder loses. This relies on a sense of activity aggregation and maximization, and obligates the government to maximize. This fails at least because the notion of activity maximization doesnt make sense, and also if the goverment lacks a duty to maximize the activity of its people.

One could also make a realist argument, that all of our lives simply fall apart when murder is tolerated. The government cannot be constrained from what will throw it into violent conflict with with its constituents who wont accept murder. Thus, regardless of how entitled to the activity of their life, even if that activity something evil like murder, a government that respects that right simply cannot exist. This realist argument entails some absurdity tho. This realist argument would say, that we have a right to speech, even extremely unpopular speech, until the speech becomes so unpopular that the government would lose its integrity entirely at the hands of its very angry people, at which point certain speech becomes a crime.