Two Notions of Belief|||20150302|||nIts been a normal enough claim that our own mental content can be unknown to us. How could that be? Why wouldnt our mental content be right there in front of us all the time? What does it mean to have an unknown belief or desire? For the purpose of this paper I wont try and distinguish desires, beliefs, and knowledge. Ill take them as all being the same thing in different contexts and connotations.

I suppose what it means to have an unknown desire, is something like, one can see a bug and impulsively kill it, only then learn they had a desire to kill it. Or they might kill a bug and feel unexpected remorse for the bug, and learn they desired the bug to live. Or maybe one does these acts many times and only recognize ones feelings later upon active reflection.
|||nLets suppose that we are observing someone walk down the street, and they discover a panicked dog, and they take it in to help it. We would conclude that they had a desire to help the dog, and we would infer this from his actions. But lets suppose, that this person helped the dog automatically, with no consciousness of themselves. As observers, weve established their desire, but in what sense is it theirs to possess? Its theirs in the sense that it describes them and their activity, tho admittedly absent from their mind. Who has the desire 'on their mind'? Only us the observers. The concept of desire is used by us the observers who witness the man, not the man himself.

I of course dont mean, we feel the desire, I mean the only people conscious of the desire are us, the observers. Only to us the observers, does the mans desire mean anything. The concept of desire serves to describe whats compelling the mans actions. Its a description only, even if its an accurate description.

The imagery of desire being a little motor in a persons head can mislead, even if it isnt wrong. Just as we imagine the man having 'mental machinery' that compels him to help the dog, us observers too have mental machinery, which attributes desires to others. To us the observers, the concept of desire plays a role; what plays a role to the man helping a dog is the dog.|||nShould the dog-helping man get home and settle down later, reflect on himself, and then realize his desire towards the dog, is he doing the same thing us observers did? When he gets home and reflects, he observes himself suddenly; does he do so just like we did? He couldnt visually see what he did in the past of course, but he does have his memory. Is the thing he 'observes' through his memory what we observed? Does he infer what he desires from what he did, or does he perceive his desire directly? (Does he perceive it, even if it was something in the past?)

If I discover my own beliefs like anyone else would discover my beliefs, then we have to accept that none of us have any special internal perception of our own beliefs or desires. We witness our beliefs and desires like we would witness any phenonemon external to us. What I mean by this, is that one observing their own beliefs would be as detatched from themself as observing the weather. 

Us observers had the opportunity to witness the dog-helping mans desire, not because of the nature of having a desire, but just because we werent preoccupied by a dog. The constraints on ones ability to witness a belief are completely practical, not logical. The opportunity to witness a deisre was determined by just practical social facts about what someone can focus on while confronted with a dog.|||nIsnt all of this is odd? It cant fully account for what it means to believe (and I dont think it does). Our account of belief so far, would enable us to say, that I might go to the fridge to get some food, but then only after I ascertain that the fridge is my destination, do I believe I am hungry. We are saying, that I am always 'trailing behind' my beliefs.|||nWhat I would like to do is make a firm split between two notions of belief. 

The first notion, is that beliefs are just descriptions of people. We talk about beliefs as a way of describing people and what they do. When we say someone believes X, we are saying something like 'they act as if they live in the (perhaps fictional) world in which X is true'. When we are talking about someones beliefs, we are talking about them in a way that they are equally qualified to do regarding themselves.

This notion has some very nice consequences. If beliefs are descriptions, then they are given in the context of what a listener understands. Are 'Henry believes B' or 'Henry is a B-ist' true statements? Lets ask what a listener expects B to compel. Does Henry do the sorts of things I would imagine a person doing if confronted with B? Henry is a B-ist, not only if he has some internal property of believing B, but whether B is a coherent proposition to Henrys peers. Do Henrys peers understand B? If so, then they understand what it means for Henry to be a B-ist. Henry might get very little say in whether he is a B-ist. 

Or another example, you could imagine Henry telling someone else he is a B-ist. He could do so, if he knows the statement 'Im a B-ist' is meaningful to his listener. He doesnt need to introspect to recognize if he is a B-ist. He just needs to know what B-ists do in society.

Whether or not one can self report a belief as easily as they could attribute a belief to someone else, again, is just a practical matter. Ones ability to self report a belief has nothing to do with a special kind of intimacy with their own beliefs. Some sorts of beliefs, we would trust a person could self-report, others we would doubt. Its a question of culture and responsibility, not introspective capacity.|||nThe second notion, is that belief as whatever mental content is immediate and intimate. Our beliefs are our reasons for acting, and being such they command our activity. They are inseparable from our activity. This account of belief, makes beliefs incommunicable. We are alone with our beliefs. If I acknowledged my intimate belief B, and suddenly tried to testify of possessing belief B, I am suddenly not intimate with belief B anymore, but rather whatever belief that is instrumental to me in producing my testimony (such as a belief in how to testify, a belief in what to say). My beliefs, the content of my mind, change as I do in each moment. These intimate beliefs are fleeting. These intimate beliefs never have any real correspondence to sentences like 'I believe B'. 

These beliefs have such a grasp on us that I dont know if they rightly deserve the weakly connoted word 'belief'. Maybe they deserve 'knowledge'? 'The facts themselves'? I want to say it is the content of the world itself that constitutes these intimate beliefs. We have in front of us facts (some of these facts are of the real world, others are rules and morals), and in the moment we recognize them we also act on them. To recognize them is to be consumed by them. In this second notion, people not only have a unique relationship with their beliefs, but an exclusive relationship with their beliefs.|||nThere are lots of difficulties associated with talking about beliefs- 'handling' beliefs. We often just dont know how, and we are liable mistakes. Imagine someone confessing a belief for the first time, and they fumble through it awkwardly. They arent full of cowardice, they just dont know how to confess- they dont know the rules of confession. If one says they believe Y and they obviously dont, or they say they believe Y, but believing Y makes no sense in a given context; they arent doing so out of profound dishonesty- they havent 'lied to themself'- for them the practice of conversation on belief is foreign.

You wouldnt say someone who struggles with a new kind of math is cowardly or dishonest. Operating with beliefs is no different from operating with mathematical rules. It isnt permissable to say that children have a complete knowledge of mathematics, albiet knowledge from a mathematical school of thought that dictates one should stare at paper dumbly. When someone fails to self report a belief, its not because they are failing to report what is clear-as-day to them, but because what is clear-as-day to them doesnt instruct them on how to self report.