Whys the 4th Amendment Difficult? p0|||20160403|||nMuch of modern fourth amendment law revolves around determining: 0, when search or seizure is reasonable; and 1, under what circumstances law enforcement needs a warrant. Not only are these concerns modern, but they are uniquely so; the first legal generation in the united states simply didnt have them on their mind. Unlike people today, the founding fathers were concerned solely with general warrants. Modern readers of the fourth amendment have divided the fourth amendment into two clauses, perhaps artificially. One clause is about reasonability, and the other is about general warrants. The intention behind the fourth amendment seemed to be 'one clause' that spoke only of general warrants (the earlier drafts of the fourth amendment actually were only one clause with virtually the same content). A protection from general warrants seemed to satisfy all of the founding fathers privacy concerns. Reasonability didnt seem to be in jeopardy for them, and the appearance of 'unreasonable' in the fourth amendment seems to be less essential to its original meaning than modern readers take it.|||nModern readers of the fourth amendment see the word 'unreasonable', and interpret it to mean something like 'the every day reasoning of normal people'. For better or worse, that is not what the word meant in early American law. 'Reasonable' in early American law meant something like 'established in common law', or 'from the judgement of a judge'. Whether strictly, or loosely, it references the involvement of the judiciary in the warrant process. If one interprets law textually, our protection from unreasonable search, isnt a protection from searches made from unsound judgements, but a protection from searches made without the involvement of the judiciary.

Modern people might understand the importance of an independent judiciary as being a matter of impartiality. Modern people are worried that police officers might have a prejudice due to their relationship with criminals and their law enforcement duties. I dont know when this understanding arose in common law countries, but it at least wasnt the first understanding. 

The original purpose of the warrant was essentially classist. At the time of the founding, there wasnt a professional law enforcement. Criminal proceedings were motivated either by normal people, or unprofessional part-time constables, whos role in the legal system was largely that of physical man power. Constraining the man-power of the law with a warrant, was more a matter of providing judgement to people who lacked the capacity to judge, than it was correcting biased judgement. Normal people didnt have the knowledge or sense regarding when to search or seize. In England, in the period previous to Americas founding, the judiciary had a closer association to the executive than it does today. Many modern American jurists see the judiciary as overseers of the executive, but at the founding, english lawyers saw the judiciary as representing the monarch, which included its superior judgement.|||nWithout a warrant, people would be acting as private individuals, and their searches and seizures would be trespass or kidnapping. There was no question among the founding fathers as to whether a search could occur without a warrant, because people simply werent willing to search without the protection of a warrant. To do so would be to incur a personal liability. Almost all searches, seizures, and arrests in the original America occured with a warrant.

Things are different now. A police officer witnesses a crime directly and arrests on his own initiative so long as its reasonable. Modern police have immunities from criminal or civil penalty when they act within their capacity as an officer of the law, even if they dont have a warrant.|||nIs modern law enforcement 'reasonable'? Well, judges are still writing common law on police conduct. In that sense, their 'reasoning' is still involved in searches and seizures. If 'reasonable' instead means that all search and seizure require a warrant, then modern law enforcement certainly is violating the original fourth amendment. Tho, if that is what the fourth amendment demands, then I doubt that a modern society could adhere to it.