Sources of Moral Knowledge|||20160420|||nIf the world only contained good people and bad people, and neither groups members ever doubted that they were good or bad; there would be no ethical problems to solve. There would be no ethical concerns, in the same way the a wind that blows either west or east doesnt have an ethical concern.

Hypothetically, all the ethical problems could be solved and not all the badness eliminated. Ethical problems exist only to the extent that rightness and wrongness are in dispute, and not everything is disputable. A person who is doing ethics, is only discovering what is good, and not necessarily doing what is good. A person who discovers whats good stops discovering. 

Ethical activity is finding sources of moral knowledge.|||n'But sometimes one doesnt morally reflect, when they should have.' Yes, but moral reflection is an action like every other, and if moral knowledge dictates how we should act, then it can also dictate when we should morally reflect. If moral knowledge tells us when to apologize, it also tells us when to ponder whether to apologize.

One might not morally reflect when they should have. True too, one might morally reflect when they shouldnt. Goodness is not accomplished by a maximization of reflection.

|||nWashington DC is the capital of the United States. Is that moral knowledge? It might be to someone taking a geography test in school. 'But how do you know they should answer questions correctly?'- forgo this inquiry. Maybe we know they should answer questions correctly, and maybe we dont, but either way, people dont fall into moral crisis on the subject. Its just not a moral problem. You might want it to be a moral problem, and maybe one day it will be, but today its not. Students are consumed by the concerns of students, and are not consumed with whether they should be a student.

A moral inquiry- a form of doubt- requires its basis. Its basis is either there or not. |||nWhere does moral knowledge come from? Avoid big answers to this question. Sure, your religion might morally inform you. So could your waiter at a restaurant.

Where does moral knowledge come from? Well, what would relieve you of indecision? Dont mistake what I am saying; you can still wrongly derive moral knowledge. You can solve your ethical problems by becoming a bad person. Thats not satisfactory? Well, if you want a moral solution that is correct, and also garuantees its own correctness, you are asking for too much. Religion and morality join at the point where one risks being incorrect. Religion and morality join at the point where one accepts judgement prior to knowing if they are good or bad.|||nIts common enough to say 'just because you could do it, doesnt mean you should do it'. Fair enough, but this is also true: because you should do it, you could do it; and more abstractly: what we can do, and what we should do, are dependent on each other. What one should do, is determined by what one can do. Our moral knowledge is a function of our capacities. People with different capacities have different moral knowledge.