Some Problems with Health Care|||20161023|||nThere are a bunch of problems in the economics of healthcare, and the multiplicity of these problems complicate the public discussion of health care. I would like to explain a bit about the economics of health care in this post.|||nHealth care and health insurance are different things, and confounding the two makes the conversation very difficult. So lets make things clear. Healthcare is the stuff we spend money on to treat and prevent illnesses. Medicine and doctors are both examples of real tangible health care. 

Health insurance, and insurance generally, is protection from risk. We buy car insurance to protect ourselves from the unavoidable risk of something really bad happening to our car. The unavoidability part is important; risk that are avoidable we simply avoid. We buy car insurance, because even if you are a skilled and careful drive, theres still a pretty good chance youll get in an accident. You dont want to get in an accident, but there is nothing you can do about it short of not driving at all, so you just buy protection- you buy an agreement to receive a lot of money if a catastrophe happens. Insurance makes sense in many different contexts, like life insurance, house insurance, agricultural insurance.

What is health insurance then? Well, in theory its protecting yourself from health catastrophe. Health insurance doesnt buy health, in the same way that when car insurance doesnt buy a car. You are buying compensation for when you lose your car, and so health insurance ought to be compensation for when you lose your health. Thats what the term should be refering to, and thats basically how health insurance used to be earlier in American history. Health insurance used to be more like unemployment protection. Workers knew that if they lost their arm they wouldnt be able to make an income, and to ensure they would survive beyond such an accident they bought an agreement to receive money if they lost their arm (health insurance). It wasnt about getting your health back, that was a forgone conclusion.

For whatever reason, health insurance in America isnt operating as it should. The thing we call health insurance isnt used as protection against catastrophic illness, rather its used to treat the normal health needs people have. We dont use health insurance to mitigate risk. We use health insurance as a vehicle for buying health care, often outside the context of any illness at all. Your car insurance doesnt pay for your gas, your home insurance doesnt pay your utilities, why does health insurance buy check ups and preventative care? Getting the flu isnt catastrophic, nor is it rare, nor is it totally unavoidable. These arent the sort of things insurance should be paying for.|||nPart of the discussion on US health care revolves around making health care accessible. For liberals, making health care accessible is basically a welfare concern: some people cannot afford health care. The moral claim is that the very poor and deprived, should be receiving health care at any cost and by any means. To address this, we could implement a health care welfare program to ensure the worst-off get health care. Indeed, such a program exists already. medicaid gives health care to the poor, and medicare gives health care to the old and disabled. Many liberals in the US want a single payer health care system, but its worth noting that we already have two single payer systems! What liberals might want to specify, is they want a single payer system that doesnt discriminate on the basis of age, disability, or class. 

The welfare aspect of health care is over emphasized in the current political discussion. Health care has become a big issue in recent history, not because our solution to the welfare problems of health care are lacking. While Obamacare expands medicaid, it is not a welfare program. I will touch on that later in this post.|||nThe primary focus of Obamacare is on reducing the costs of health care, and thats a real issue its trying to solve. People dont really focus towards cost issues, maybe because death and disease are more striking than finance. Regardless as to what people find striking, health care costs a lot and it makes a big difference on our lives. Health care costs eat up a third of peoples income. If you could reduce that by 50% you are giving working people about a month of their productive lives back. People outside of America, receive health care about as good as American health care, for much less. Thats the primary problem that Obamacare addresses.

So. Why do we spend so much on health care? I wont pretend that there is one reason, but there sure are sufficient reasons. One reason Ill dive into in this section.

Since our health care system is based around insurance, the insured are encouraged to over-consume health care. This is because insurance is basically a fixed price, and the amount of health care they can receive at that fixed price is unlimited. Once someone has insurance, their insurer is on the hook to pay for the health care they consume. So, to get the most value out of your insurance, you get as much health care as possible.

Its pretty easy to see how this works. Imagine a grocery store that charged a monthly fee, whereupon you could take as much food as you wanted. After one pays their fee, they are going to take as much as they can. Since people are consuming a lot of groceries, and the grocer has to by those groceries, the grocer has to set the monthly fee very high. No one is really happy with this system. People would rather pay $3 for one gallon of milk, than pay $300 and then consume milk to the point of misery. Because people consume more, grocers have to buy more, and since demand goes up, price inevitably goes up too, which means if you try and buy your groceries from the grocers supplier, youll still face steep prices (which is why out of pocket costs for health care are so high).

Insurance companies dont really like this circumstance either. If you are skeptical of corporations, it might surprise you to learn that companies dont like costs. Raising your price earns you the scorn of business hating Americans, but it wont earn you money if your costs go up too. Insurance companies understand that they are buying health care their clients arent getting value from, and they think they can give their clients the same value at a lower cost if only they could convince their clients to consume health care more wisely. They have a few tricks to accomplish this. The first one is a co-pay. The idea is that clients get sensitized to costs if they have to pay a fraction of the cost, and that if they are sensitive to costs, they will try and minimize them. This trick kind of works, but if you wanted to perfectly sensitize them to costs you would give them a co-pay of 100%, which would then just be them paying for their own health care. But if that were the case, clients would just be paying for their own health care, and the insurer isnt providing a service anymore. Insurers are counting on there being a psychological effect from paying a small fraction versus not paying, but economically all levels of co-pay are going to encourage over-consumption. The other trick insurers try is to just micro manage what kind of care clients can get. If insurers can have a say in what kind of care their clients get, than they can allocate care in a cost effective manner. The weakness of this trick is that clients just dont like being told what to do, they dont like the contractual overhead, and when they get told they cant get certain health care they feel betrayed by their insurer. On top of that, a nefarious insurer would want to deny all care their customers seek to minimize costs, so we should expect insurers to some times deny coverage when they shouldnt if they have more discretion

Weve had political gridlock for so long, in part because no politician will successfully sell the American people on the idea that they get too much health care. Of course, 'health care is over-allocated' does not describe the current health care problems in America, but its an essential part of the economic mechanism that creates our current problems. People frame the problem as normal people not getting the care they paid for, and naturally that appears to be under-allocation. But we could just as easily frame the issue as someone with a very mild health problem taking a pill with a small benefit but costs hundreds of dollars. It never occurs to that person to be unhappy, because they dont pay the bill if they have insurance. People also dont frame the issue as someone at the end of their life consuming massive amounts of health care with their insurer footing the bill. About half of everyones life time health care expenditure is in the last six months of their life. I think fair minded people can see that in these examples people are receiving care that benefits them, but comes at an immense public cost that expresses itself in our insurance prices. If you like our current system, and dont like our current prices, you have to come to terms with the idea that some people are receiving care that they shouldnt receive.|||nTheres another economic problem, which has a cool economic term 'adverse selection'. Rather than just define this term outright, let me tell you about some typical concerns an insurer might have.

Lets say that everyone in society has a 1% chance of suffering a heart attack. Lets also say that $50,000 is good compensation for a heart attack. You are an insurer, and since you can expect each of your clients to have a 1% chance of losing $50,000 in their quality of life, you charge each of them $500 for insurance (0.01 * 50,000), plus whatever your fee is. If the world were that simple, this would work fine.

Thats not the real world however. People are very inequal in their health, and therefore they are very inequal in their likelihood to suffer disease too. Some people are very unhealthy and are definitely going to cost a lot of money to insure. If you think you can just charge the average expected health care costs between the healthy and unhealthy, think again. Someone who is healthy, needs insurance less, because they have less risk. Lets say a healthy person, knowing of their good health, is willing to pay $300 for health insurance, but not $500. Then consider a very unhealthy person, who knows they will have a health catastrophe. They are probably willing to spend more than $500 on health insurance. If average health care costs are $500, you cant just charge $500, because then healthy people just wont buy it. Since healthy people wont buy it, the insurers are left with only unhealthy customers, who cost more than $500. Since the average costs among an insurance pool of unhealthy people are more than $500, the insurers have to charge more than $500, which causes even more people to balk at the price. Charging everyone the average expected health care costs creates a cycle that leads the price of insurance reflecting the least healthiest persons health care costs, which are very high.

There is a simple solution to this problem. That solution is to just let insurers charge different people different amounts. You, the insurer, can take their info, and make a calculated guess about their health care costs, and then you price them an insurance plan accordingly. The system works.

Normies dont really like this, they find the idea of people getting charged different amounts abhorrent. Nor do they like the idea that a sick person, the very sort of person who needs health insurance, getting denied health insurance because they cost so much. This is all part of the pre-existing conditions section of the national discussion. Laws exist reflecting this public disapproval. These laws ban price discrimination, and force insurers to accept applicants. The consequence of these laws isnt that all people get health care, but that healthy people choose not to buy it, and unhealthy people are stuck with system worse than if they just paid for their own costs directly.

This is where we were prior to Obamacare, and the primary mechanism of Obamacare addresses the phenomenon of healthy people opting out of health insurance by forcing them to buy it. With the re-introduction of healthy people to the insurance pool, health insurance costs should go down. Im not sure if thats how things have actually played out tho. I dont know if young healthy people are opting into the health care system to a degree necessary to actually reduce the cost of insurance, and for whatever reason insurers are dropping out of the markets, essentially granting insurers monopolies. If we dont repeal Obamacare we will get a chance to see what it does. Presently, it seems plausible that its net effect isnt lower health insurance costs, but wide spread tax penalties and insurance prices further inflated by anti-competitive rules.