CtPaint, Immaterial Design, & the Future|||20160317|||nIf you havent heard of it, material design is a very popular design standard among computer people right now. Its Googles design standard, so you must be familiar with it one way or another. 

Material design, roughly specifies that user interfaces should conform to a users understanding of the physical world, in terms of simple models. Physical objects have dimensions, textures, and move through the world. Software users are familiar with physical matter, and by capitalizing on their pre-existing knowledge of matter, software can guide a user. A user will know how to interact with software when information is conveyed to them by analogy with the physical world.|||nOnly by contrast with the popularity of material design, have I realized that my own personal design standard is basically the negation of material design. In many moments of designing, I try and recognize components that are analogized with the real world, and I then try and modify them so that they are not longer so. My reasoning has been that computer user interfaces are distinctly not physical. Symbolic images are already free from physical laws, to comform to them is a compromise symbols dont need to make. If I see a black stroke supended over nothing I dont expect it to fall because I know gravity does not act on it. Computers should 'be themselves' and should not only express that freedom, but also embody it.|||nSo, how have I put this into practice? CtPaint (ctpaint.us) contains a great example of this. CtPaint is some simple image software I made that greatly resembles MSPaint. There are lots of software out there named 'paint', and just like their name, their features are analogized with real world painting tools, like pencils, brushes, and paint cans. When I got to work on CtPaint, I made it a point to do the opposite. 

To show you what I mean, consider the pencil tool in MSPaint. The pencil tool will change a pixels color if the pixel is clicked on. Rather than symbolize this tool with a pencil image, I wanted to make a symbol which communicated that only one pixel will be changed at a time. The symbol itself should have a morphology that says 'one pixel will change at a time'. The 'pencil tool' in CtPaint is symbolized by just a dot, and thats because just one dot will be changed by operation of this tool.

Furthermore in CtPaint, There is no paint brush tool that makes broad strokes, but one can increase the size of the 'pencil' tool and the dot icon will grow into a circle to demonstrate its new broadness. Aside from broadness, there is no difference between a pencil and a paint brush, so the analogy to the physical world artificially segregates this functionality into two seperate tools.|||nIsnt a matter based design philosophy better, because people know about matter? Its the best, because you dont have to explain anything to people. If people ever become naive about the physical world, then we would have a weaker argument for adopting material design. In that case, if computer users ever became detached from the physical world then maybe something else should guide design.

At some point in the future, analogizing with the physical world will become a strained effort. Computer symbols will become strained for the same reason that all modern words are to some extent strained: they are determined by the past, which is necessarily different from the present. Future computer symbols will be determined by our present, which is necessarily alien to the future.

Consider the use of 'tags' on websites like youtube. Tagging is a computer process that is symbolized with what looks like a physical tag. Tagging an item on a computer is already a strained analogy with physical tagging, but still the word 'tag' and the tag symbol are very instructive to computer users. At some point 'tag' will simply mean what it means, and its historical connection to physical tags will be something for wikipedia articles.|||nIf the computer world is increasing in priority, then success of material design is temporary. In a future where people have a weaker association to the physical world, a computer world dedicated to material-decoration will be baroque. Material design is a transitory step to a future where the computer world takes priority over the physical. 